docs/src/recipes/recommendation.asciidoc, before:

////
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
////
[[recommendation]]
== Recommendation

image:gremlin-recommendation.png[float=left,width=180]One of the more common use cases for a graph database is the
development of link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recommender_system[recommendation systems] and a simple approach to
doing that is through link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collaborative_filtering[collaborative filtering].
Collaborative filtering assumes that if a person shares one set of opinions with a different person, they are likely to
have similar taste with respect to other issues. With that basis in mind, it is then possible to make predictions for a
specific person as to what their opinions might be.

As a simple example, consider a graph that contains "person" and "product" vertices connected by "bought" edges. The
following script generates some data for the graph using that basic schema:

[gremlin-groovy]
----
g.addV("person").property("name","alice").
  addV("person").property("name","bob").
  addV("person").property("name","jon").
  addV("person").property("name","jack").
  addV("person").property("name","jill")iterate()
(1..10).each {
  g.addV("product").property("name","product #${it}").iterate()
}; []
(3..7).each {
  g.V().has("person","name","alice").as("p").
    V().has("product","name","product #${it}").addE("bought").from("p").iterate()
}; []
(1..5).each {
  g.V().has("person","name","bob").as("p").
    V().has("product","name","product #${it}").addE("bought").from("p").iterate()
}; []
(6..10).each {
  g.V().has("person","name","jon").as("p").
    V().has("product","name","product #${it}").addE("bought").from("p").iterate()
}; []
1.step(10, 2) {
  g.V().has("person","name","jack").as("p").
    V().has("product","name","product #${it}").addE("bought").from("p").iterate()
}; []
2.step(10, 2) {
  g.V().has("person","name","jill").as("p").
    V().has("product","name","product #${it}").addE("bought").from("p").iterate()
}; []
----

The first step to making a recommendation to "alice" using collaborative filtering is to understand what she bought:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('name','alice').out('bought').values('name')
----

The following diagram depicts one of the edges traversed in the above example between "alice" and "product #5".
Obviously, the other products "alice" bought would have similar relations, but this diagram and those to follow will
focus on the neighborhood around that product.

image:recommendation-alice-1.png[width=500]

The next step is to determine who else purchased those products:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('name','alice').out('bought').in('bought').dedup().values('name')
----

It is worth noting that "alice" is in the results above. She should really be excluded from the list as the
interest is in what individuals other than herself purchased:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('name','alice').as('her').
      out('bought').
      in('bought').where(neq('her')).
      dedup().values('name')
----

The following diagram shows "alice" and those others who purchased "product #5".

image:recommendation-alice-2.png[width=600]

The knowledge of the people who bought the same things as "alice" can then be used to find the set of products that
they bought:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('name','alice').as('her').
      out('bought').
      in('bought').where(neq('her')).
      out('bought').
      dedup().values('name')
----

image:recommendation-alice-3.png[width=800]

This set of products could be the basis for recommendation, but it is important to remember that "alice" may have
already purchased some of these products and it would be better to not pester her with recommendations for products
that she already owns. Those products she already purchased can be excluded as follows:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('name','alice').as('her').
      out('bought').aggregate('self').
      in('bought').where(neq('her')).
      out('bought').where(without('self')).
      dedup().values('name')
----

image:recommendation-alice-4.png[width=800]

The final step would be to group the remaining products (instead of `dedup()` which was mostly done for demonstration
purposes) to form a ranking:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('person','name','alice').as('her').     <1>
      out('bought').aggregate('self').            <2>
      in('bought').where(neq('her')).             <3>
      out('bought').where(without('self')).       <4>
      groupCount().
      order(local).
        by(values, decr)                          <5>
----

<1> Find "alice" who is the person for whom the product recommendation is being made.
<2> Traverse to the products that "alice" bought and gather them for later use in the traversal.
<3> Traverse to the "person" vertices who bought the products that "alice" bought and exclude "alice" herself from that list.
<4> Given those people who bought similar products to "alice", find the products that they bought and exclude those that she already bought.
<5> Group the products and count the number of times they were purchased by others to come up with a ranking of products to recommend to "alice".

The previous example was already described as "basic" and obviously could take into account whatever data is available
to further improve the quality of the recommendation (e.g. product ratings, times of purchase, etc.).  One option to
improve the quality of what is recommended (without expanding the previous dataset) might be to choose the person
vertices that make up the recommendation to "alice" who have the largest common set of purchases.

Looking back to the previous code example, consider its more strip down representation that shows those individuals
who have at least one product in common:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has("person","name","alice").as("alice").
      out("bought").aggregate("self").
      in("bought").where(neq("alice")).dedup()
----

Next, do some grouping to find count how many products they have in common:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has("person","name","alice").as("alice").
      out("bought").aggregate("self").
      in("bought").where(neq("alice")).dedup().
      group().
        by().by(out("bought").
      where(within("self")).count())
----

The above output shows that the best that can be expected is three common products. The traversal needs to be aware of
that maximum:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has("person","name","alice").as("alice").
      out("bought").aggregate("self").
      in("bought").where(neq("alice")).dedup().
      group().
        by().by(out("bought").
      where(within("self")).count()).
      select(values).
      order(local).
        by(decr).limit(local, 1)
----

With the maximum value available, it can be used to chose those "person" vertices that have the three products in
common:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has("person","name","alice").as("alice").
      out("bought").aggregate("self").
      in("bought").where(neq("alice")).dedup().
      group().
        by().by(out("bought").
      where(within("self")).count()).as("g").
      select(values).
      order(local).
        by(decr).limit(local, 1).as("m").
      select("g").unfold().
      where(select(values).as("m")).select(keys)
----

Now that there is a list of "person" vertices to base the recommendation on, traverse to the products that they
purchased:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has("person","name","alice").as("alice").
      out("bought").aggregate("self").
      in("bought").where(neq("alice")).dedup().
      group().
        by().by(out("bought").
      where(within("self")).count()).as("g").
      select(values).
      order(local).
        by(decr).limit(local, 1).as("m").
      select("g").unfold().
      where(select(values).as("m")).select(keys).
      out("bought").where(without("self"))
----

The above output shows that one product is held in common making it the top recommendation:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has("person","name","alice").as("alice").
      out("bought").aggregate("self").
      in("bought").where(neq("alice")).dedup().
      group().
        by().by(out("bought").
      where(within("self")).count()).as("g").
      select(values).
      order(local).
        by(decr).limit(local, 1).as("m").
      select("g").unfold().
      where(select(values).as("m")).select(keys).
      out("bought").where(without("self")).
      groupCount().
      order(local).
        by(values, decr).
        by(select(keys).values("name")).
      unfold().select(keys).values("name")
----

In considering the practical applications of this recipe, it is worth revisiting the earlier "basic" version of the
recommendation algorithm:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('person','name','alice').as('her').
      out('bought').aggregate('self').
      in('bought').where(neq('her')).
      out('bought').where(without('self')).
      groupCount().
      order(local).
        by(values, decr)
----

The above traversal performs a full ranking of items based on all the connected data. That could be a time consuming
operation depending on the number of paths being traversed. As it turns out, recommendations don't need to have perfect
knowledge of all data to provide a "pretty good" approximation of a recommendation. It can therefore make sense to
place additional limits on the traversal to have it better return more quickly at the expense of examining less data.


Gremlin provides a number of steps that can help with these limits like:
link:http://tinkerpop.apache.org/docs/x.y.z/reference/#coin-step[coin()],
link:http://tinkerpop.apache.org/docs/x.y.z/reference/#sample-step[sample()], and
link:http://tinkerpop.apache.org/docs/current/reference/#timelimit-step[timeLimit()]. For example, to have the
traversal sample the data for no longer than one second, the previous "basic" recommendation could be changed to:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('person','name','alice').as('her').
      out('bought').aggregate('self').
      in('bought').where(neq('her')).
      out('bought').where(without('self')).timeLimit(1000).
      groupCount().
      order(local).
        by(values, decr)
----

In using sampling methods, it is important to consider that the natural ordering of edges in the graph may not produce
an ideal sample for the recommendation. For example, if the edges end up being returned oldest first, then the
recommendation will be based on the oldest data, which would not be ideal. As with any traversal, it is important to
understand the nature of the graph being traversed and the behavior of the underlying graph database to properly
achieve the desired outcome.

Commit message:

TINKERPOP-1956 Deprecated Order.incr and Order.decr
Replaced by Order.asc and Order.desc respectively. Left a number of uses of decr/incr so as to ensure ongoing compatibility during deprecation.

docs/src/recipes/recommendation.asciidoc, after:

////
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
////
[[recommendation]]
== Recommendation

image:gremlin-recommendation.png[float=left,width=180]One of the more common use cases for a graph database is the
development of link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recommender_system[recommendation systems] and a simple approach to
doing that is through link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collaborative_filtering[collaborative filtering].
Collaborative filtering assumes that if a person shares one set of opinions with a different person, they are likely to
have similar taste with respect to other issues. With that basis in mind, it is then possible to make predictions for a
specific person as to what their opinions might be.

As a simple example, consider a graph that contains "person" and "product" vertices connected by "bought" edges. The
following script generates some data for the graph using that basic schema:

[gremlin-groovy]
----
g.addV("person").property("name","alice").
  addV("person").property("name","bob").
  addV("person").property("name","jon").
  addV("person").property("name","jack").
  addV("person").property("name","jill")iterate()
(1..10).each {
  g.addV("product").property("name","product #${it}").iterate()
}; []
(3..7).each {
  g.V().has("person","name","alice").as("p").
    V().has("product","name","product #${it}").addE("bought").from("p").iterate()
}; []
(1..5).each {
  g.V().has("person","name","bob").as("p").
    V().has("product","name","product #${it}").addE("bought").from("p").iterate()
}; []
(6..10).each {
  g.V().has("person","name","jon").as("p").
    V().has("product","name","product #${it}").addE("bought").from("p").iterate()
}; []
1.step(10, 2) {
  g.V().has("person","name","jack").as("p").
    V().has("product","name","product #${it}").addE("bought").from("p").iterate()
}; []
2.step(10, 2) {
  g.V().has("person","name","jill").as("p").
    V().has("product","name","product #${it}").addE("bought").from("p").iterate()
}; []
----

The first step to making a recommendation to "alice" using collaborative filtering is to understand what she bought:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('name','alice').out('bought').values('name')
----

The following diagram depicts one of the edges traversed in the above example between "alice" and "product #5".
Obviously, the other products "alice" bought would have similar relations, but this diagram and those to follow will
focus on the neighborhood around that product.

image:recommendation-alice-1.png[width=500]

The next step is to determine who else purchased those products:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('name','alice').out('bought').in('bought').dedup().values('name')
----

It is worth noting that "alice" is in the results above. She should really be excluded from the list as the
interest is in what individuals other than herself purchased:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('name','alice').as('her').
      out('bought').
      in('bought').where(neq('her')).
      dedup().values('name')
----

The following diagram shows "alice" and those others who purchased "product #5".

image:recommendation-alice-2.png[width=600]

The knowledge of the people who bought the same things as "alice" can then be used to find the set of products that
they bought:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('name','alice').as('her').
      out('bought').
      in('bought').where(neq('her')).
      out('bought').
      dedup().values('name')
----

image:recommendation-alice-3.png[width=800]

This set of products could be the basis for recommendation, but it is important to remember that "alice" may have
already purchased some of these products and it would be better to not pester her with recommendations for products
that she already owns. Those products she already purchased can be excluded as follows:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('name','alice').as('her').
      out('bought').aggregate('self').
      in('bought').where(neq('her')).
      out('bought').where(without('self')).
      dedup().values('name')
----

image:recommendation-alice-4.png[width=800]

The final step would be to group the remaining products (instead of `dedup()` which was mostly done for demonstration
purposes) to form a ranking:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('person','name','alice').as('her').     <1>
      out('bought').aggregate('self').            <2>
      in('bought').where(neq('her')).             <3>
      out('bought').where(without('self')).       <4>
      groupCount().
      order(local).
        by(values, desc)                          <5>
----

<1> Find "alice" who is the person for whom the product recommendation is being made.
<2> Traverse to the products that "alice" bought and gather them for later use in the traversal.
<3> Traverse to the "person" vertices who bought the products that "alice" bought and exclude "alice" herself from that list.
<4> Given those people who bought similar products to "alice", find the products that they bought and exclude those that she already bought.
<5> Group the products and count the number of times they were purchased by others to come up with a ranking of products to recommend to "alice".

The previous example was already described as "basic" and obviously could take into account whatever data is available
to further improve the quality of the recommendation (e.g. product ratings, times of purchase, etc.).  One option to
improve the quality of what is recommended (without expanding the previous dataset) might be to choose the person
vertices that make up the recommendation to "alice" who have the largest common set of purchases.

Looking back to the previous code example, consider its more strip down representation that shows those individuals
who have at least one product in common:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has("person","name","alice").as("alice").
      out("bought").aggregate("self").
      in("bought").where(neq("alice")).dedup()
----

Next, do some grouping to find count how many products they have in common:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has("person","name","alice").as("alice").
      out("bought").aggregate("self").
      in("bought").where(neq("alice")).dedup().
      group().
        by().by(out("bought").
      where(within("self")).count())
----

The above output shows that the best that can be expected is three common products. The traversal needs to be aware of
that maximum:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has("person","name","alice").as("alice").
      out("bought").aggregate("self").
      in("bought").where(neq("alice")).dedup().
      group().
        by().by(out("bought").
      where(within("self")).count()).
      select(values).
      order(local).
        by(desc).limit(local, 1)
----

With the maximum value available, it can be used to chose those "person" vertices that have the three products in
common:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has("person","name","alice").as("alice").
      out("bought").aggregate("self").
      in("bought").where(neq("alice")).dedup().
      group().
        by().by(out("bought").
      where(within("self")).count()).as("g").
      select(values).
      order(local).
        by(desc).limit(local, 1).as("m").
      select("g").unfold().
      where(select(values).as("m")).select(keys)
----

Now that there is a list of "person" vertices to base the recommendation on, traverse to the products that they
purchased:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has("person","name","alice").as("alice").
      out("bought").aggregate("self").
      in("bought").where(neq("alice")).dedup().
      group().
        by().by(out("bought").
      where(within("self")).count()).as("g").
      select(values).
      order(local).
        by(desc).limit(local, 1).as("m").
      select("g").unfold().
      where(select(values).as("m")).select(keys).
      out("bought").where(without("self"))
----

The above output shows that one product is held in common making it the top recommendation:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has("person","name","alice").as("alice").
      out("bought").aggregate("self").
      in("bought").where(neq("alice")).dedup().
      group().
        by().by(out("bought").
      where(within("self")).count()).as("g").
      select(values).
      order(local).
        by(desc).limit(local, 1).as("m").
      select("g").unfold().
      where(select(values).as("m")).select(keys).
      out("bought").where(without("self")).
      groupCount().
      order(local).
        by(values, desc).
        by(select(keys).values("name")).
      unfold().select(keys).values("name")
----

In considering the practical applications of this recipe, it is worth revisiting the earlier "basic" version of the
recommendation algorithm:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('person','name','alice').as('her').
      out('bought').aggregate('self').
      in('bought').where(neq('her')).
      out('bought').where(without('self')).
      groupCount().
      order(local).
        by(values, desc)
----

The above traversal performs a full ranking of items based on all the connected data. That could be a time consuming
operation depending on the number of paths being traversed. As it turns out, recommendations don't need to have perfect
knowledge of all data to provide a "pretty good" approximation of a recommendation. It can therefore make sense to
place additional limits on the traversal to have it better return more quickly at the expense of examining less data.


Gremlin provides a number of steps that can help with these limits like:
link:http://tinkerpop.apache.org/docs/x.y.z/reference/#coin-step[coin()],
link:http://tinkerpop.apache.org/docs/x.y.z/reference/#sample-step[sample()], and
link:http://tinkerpop.apache.org/docs/current/reference/#timelimit-step[timeLimit()]. For example, to have the
traversal sample the data for no longer than one second, the previous "basic" recommendation could be changed to:

[gremlin-groovy,existing]
----
g.V().has('person','name','alice').as('her').
      out('bought').aggregate('self').
      in('bought').where(neq('her')).
      out('bought').where(without('self')).timeLimit(1000).
      groupCount().
      order(local).
        by(values, desc)
----

In using sampling methods, it is important to consider that the natural ordering of edges in the graph may not produce
an ideal sample for the recommendation. For example, if the edges end up being returned oldest first, then the
recommendation will be based on the oldest data, which would not be ideal. As with any traversal, it is important to
understand the nature of the graph being traversed and the behavior of the underlying graph database to properly
achieve the desired outcome.
